---
layout: post
title:  "Zeus is a Machiavellian Psychopath: Zeus vs. the 6 Traitors"
date:   2019-12-06 06:00:00 -0000
tags: [spoilers, theories]
categories: spoilers theories
author: Bobo Glaukon
---

This is part two of a 4 part series on how Zeus, as portrayed in LO is a formidable, manipulative, political operator. In the previous installment, I wrote about how he keeps his brothers in check by allowing Poseidon (the simple one) some access to Olympus, but ensuring that he does not have an inherent power base, and completely isolating and emotionally crippling Hades. This installment explains how Zeus ensured that he was installed as the king, and that the remaining members of the Six Traitors Dynasty cannot overthrow him either. Zeus may have harmed Hades, but he is not far behind in his wicked treatment of Hera.

As mentioned before in LO, only Zeus, Poseidon and Hades are children of Cronos, which sets up a different political dynamic than in myth. Nonetheless, while Hera, Hestia and Demeter are not members of the royal family, Hecate includes them in the six traitors dynasty, and Nyx confirms Hera as a member. Therefore, we can reasonably conclude that the three goddesses were reasonably important in the Titanomachy, and Zeus would need at least their assent to rule.

Zeus' first order of business had to be Hera. It is unclear in LO where Hera sits in the hierarchy of power, but she developed a relationship with Hades, Zeus' prime competitor. LO has not revealed how Zeus sheered Hera off Hades, but he did. By making Hera queen, he tied her fate to his in a meaningful way.

Binding Hera to him is an important first step, but Zeus ensures Hera's continued political loyalty with his perennial infidelity. While counter-intuitive, cheating on Hera serves three important purposes. First, as Hera herself acknowledges, it is a reminder that Zeus can do whatever he wants and there is nothing Hera can do to stop him. We know nothing about divorce in the LO-verse, but regardless if Hera leaves Zeus she absolutely will lose her status as queen and could even end up in Tartarus. As long as Hades is broken, and Poseidon is gormless, Hera has no reasonable expectation of successfully removing Zeus and retaining some influence and luxury.

Second, Zeus' infidelity emotionally grinds Hera down the way Zeus' isolation of Hades grinds him down. Apparently Hera has no problems getting a little lovin' in the side, but clearly Zeus' infidelities bother her. On two different occasions so far Hera has gotten so frustrated with Zeus that only the intervention of her children prevent her from doing something incredibly rash. First, when she almost commits to preventing Hades and Persephone from developing a relationship, Hebe intervenes and casts the situation in a more reasonable light. Her fight with Zeus nearly escalates to violence, perhaps of the supernatural kind, before Ares intervenes.

Finally, Zeus' affairs are "side ventures" he can turn to immediately reinforce himself if necessary. Zeus does not need Hera for sex, family or heirs. While Zeus' dalliances may or may not be consensual in all cases, at least Thetis is a witting and willing participant. Thetis knows she is the "side piece" but believes, most likely correctly, Thetis also believes there is a potential status upgrade if things go pear-shaped with Hera.

Almost as important as keeping Hera in check and away from Hades is keeping Demeter in check and away from Hades. We have not seen much from Demeter in LO, but we know that she is very wealthy, and was a potential suitor for Hades. Demeter is not part of Cronus' family, but she has another potential claim to the throne: her role in fertility and the harvest. Both Demeter and Cronus were responsible for the harvest, and consequently occupy a special place in mortal affairs. Her name (in real myth) probably denotes a mother goddess, and therefore a goddess with special power and prestige. If Demeter and Hades had joined together in marriage, they might have been able to challenge Zeus *on their own* and Zeus could not allow that.

There is no evidence that Zeus was responsible for the rift between Hades and Demeter&mdash;even psychopaths get lucky breaks sometimes&mdash;but Zeus has demonstrated an ability and willingness to manipulate people to get what he wants. Equally important was keeping Demeter away from Olympus, and Zeus claims responsibility for driving Demeter away. Whether she left of her own accord, was actually exiled, or was manipulated into leaving removing Demeter from Olympus ensured that she could join no conspiracy to overthrow Zeus. Whatever Zeus does to drive Demeter away may have been unrelated to Zeus' position, but whatever it was obviated the need for Zeus to take further action.

It is also in Zeus best interest to alienate Demeter as much as possible from Olympus. Allowing Demeter to conduct her affairs unmolested in the mortal realm, gives her no additional reason to be interested in Olympus. Keeping her in the mortal realm also prevents her from forming relationships that could form the core of a cabal to overthrow Zeus. Persephone's presence in Olympus is a potential threat to Demeter's isolation, because it places something Demeter values in Olympus, giving Demeter a reason to care about Olympus and potentially get involved.

Zeus, therefore has every incentive to get Persephone to leave or Demeter to take her back. Whether facilitating a one-night-stand between one of his brothers and Persephone or allowing Persephone's rapist to go unpunished, both give Persephone good reason to leave Olympus and Demeter to take Persephone back. If Persephone takes up permanent residence in the Underworld, Demeter could again become a threat by throwing in her lot with Hades for he daughter's sake. Once it becomes apparent that Hades and Persephone are smitten kittens, Hades has strong incentive to ensure that Persephone's misfortune is at least partially perceived as Hades fault. Nothing would to that more than convincing Hades to actually kidnap Persephone to marry her. 

The final member of the Six Traitors Dynasty is Hestia, who so far is a political cypher. She seems to be primarily concerned with adhering to rules, but also does not seem to want confrontation. Hestia in LO seems to hew closely to the mythological Hestia. Though Hestia was theologically and culturally important, without any of the other members of the Six Traitors Dynasty, especially not a superior claimant to the throne, it seems unlike Hestia would conspire against Zeus, and even less likely she would succeed. Therefore, Hestia alone is not a problem for Zeus, but *could* become a problem if the four others begin to revolt.

Zeus has masterfully manipulated those nearest to him to secure his rule. Poseidon is only a threat if he joins with another god, and Poseidon is married to a nymph. Hades could be that other god, but Zeus cripples Hades emotionally and isolates him politically. Marrying and emotionally abusing Hera simultaneously makes it difficult for her to turn on him without tremendous risks to her status, while reducing her ability to coordinate against him with others (like Hades). Driving Demeter to the mortal realm leaves only Hestia in Olympus, and Hestia is too concerned with order to act alone. Next time, I'll bring in the other Olympians (plus Eros) and explain how Zeus has used the principle of divide and conquer to retain control over the entirety of Olympus.
